Twarc Tutorial (#558)
DocNow/twarc: docs/tutorial.md

```

Now for the purposes of this tutorial we're going to stop exploring any further, but we could continue to refine and improve this query to match our research question. Twitter lets you build very long queries (up to 512 characters on the standard track and 1024 for the academic track) so you have plenty of scope to express yourself.

If we apply the same kind of process to the platypus case, we might end up with something like the following. In this case it was necessary to use the [Twitter search web interface](https://twitter.com/explore) to find some of the variations in the word platypus:

```shell
twarc2 counts "(platypus OR platpus's OR platypi OR platypusses OR platypuses) -is:retweet" --granularity day --text
```

Having decided on the actual queries to run and examined the counts, now it's time to actually collect the tweets! We can take the queries we ran earlier, replace the `counts` command with the `search` and remove the `counts` specific arguments to get:

```shell
twarc2 search "(echidna OR echidna's OR echidnas) -is:retweet" echidna.json

twarc2 search "(platypus OR platpus's OR platypi OR platypusses OR platypuses) -is:retweet" platypus.json
```

> Running these two commands will save the tweets matching each of those searches to two files on our disk, which we will use for the next sessions. While saving the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running these two commands will save the tweets matching each of those searches to two files on our disk, which we will use for the next sessions.
```

![Screenshot showing the progress of the tweets being downloaded](images/twarc_progress_download.png)

TIP: if you're not sure where the files above have been saved, you can run the command `cd` on Windows, or `pwd` on Mac to have your shell print out the folder in the filesystem where twarc has been working.

## Understanding and transforming twitter JSON data

> Now that we've collected some data, it's time to take a look at it. Let's start by viewing the collected data in it's plainest form: as a text file. Although we named the file with an extension of `.json`, this is just a convention: the actual file content is a plain text in the [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) format. Let's open this file with our inbuilt text editor (notepad on Windows, ... on Mac).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we've collected some data, it's time to take a look at it. Let's start by viewing the collected data in its plainest form: as a text file. Although we named the file with an extension of `.json`, this is just a convention: the actual file content is a plain text in the [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) format. Let's open this file with our inbuilt text editor (Notepad on Windows, TextEdit on Mac).
```

## Making a CSV file from our collected tweets

We don't recommend trying to manually parse this raw data unless you have specific needs that aren't covered by existing tools. So we're going to use the `twarc-csv` package that we installed earlier to do the heavy lifting of transforming the collected JSON into a more friendly comma-separated value ([CSV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values)) file. CSV is a simple plaintext format, but unlike JSON format is easy to import or open with a spreadsheet.

The `twarc-csv` package lets us use a `csv` command to transform the files from twarc:

```shell
twarc2 csv echidna.json echidna.csv

twarc2 csv platypus.json platypus.csv
```

If we look at these files in our text editor again, we'll see a nice structure of one line per tweet, with all of the many columns for that tweet.

![Screenshot of the plaintext CSV file in notepad](images/echidna_csv.png)

> Since we're going to do more analysis with the Pandas library to answer our question, we will want to create the CSV with only the columns of interest. This will reduce the time and amount of RAM you need to load your dataset. For example, the following commands produce CSV files with a small number of fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we're going to do more analysis with the Pandas library to answer our question, we will want to create the CSV with only the columns of interest. This will reduce the time and amount of computer memory/RAM you need to load your dataset. For example, the following commands produce CSV files with a small number of fields:
```

```

### The problem with Excel

It's tempting to try to open these CSV files directly in Excel, but if you do you're probably going to notice one or more of the following problems, as illustrated below:

1. The ID columns are likely to be broken.
2. Emoji and languages that don't use latin characters may not appear correctly.
3. Tweets may be broken up on newlines.
4. Excel can only support 1,048,576 rows - it's very easy to collect tweet datasets bigger than this.

![Screenshot of the broken CSV file opened directly in excel](images/excel_echidna.png)

If you save a file from Excel with any of those problems that file is no longer useful for most purposes (this is a common and longstanding problem with using spreadsheet software, that affects many fields. For example in genomics: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02211-4). While it is possible to make Excel do the right thing with your data, it takes more work, and a single mistake can lead to loss of important data. Therefore our recommendation is, if possible, to avoid the use of spreadsheets for analysing Twitter data.

### Working with Pandas

> If you are going to be using the scientific Python library [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) for any processing or analysis, you may wish use Pandas methods to load your data. This is used to load and manipulate data like we have in our CSV file. Note that for this section we're going to run a very simple computation, the references will have links to more extensive resources for learning more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are going to be using the scientific Python library [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) for any processing or analysis, you may wish to use Pandas methods. Pandas can be used to load and manipulate data like we have in our CSV file. Note that for this section we're going to run a very simple computation, the references will have links to more extensive resources for learning more.
```

```python
# process_monotremes.py

import pandas

echidna = pandas.read_csv("echidna_minimal.csv")
platypus = pandas.read_csv("platypus_minimal.csv")

echidna_likes = echidna["public_metrics.like_count"].sum()
platypus_likes = platypus["public_metrics.like_count"].sum()

print(f"Total likes on echidna tweets: {echidna_likes}. Total likes on platypus tweets: {platypus_likes}.")
```

Run this script through Python to see which of the monotremes is the coolest:

```shell
python process_monotremes.py
```

### Answering the research question: which monotreme is the coolest?

At the time of creating this tutorial, the above script run with the just collected data leads to the following result:

```shell
Total likes on echidna tweets: 1787652. Total likes on platypus tweets: 3462715.
```

> On that basis, we can conclude that at the time of running this search the platypus is nearly twice as cool as measured by Twitter likes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On that basis, we can conclude that at the time of running this search the platypus is nearly twice as cool as the echnida based on Twitter likes.
```

Of course this is a simplistic approach to answering this specific research question - we could have made many other choices. Even using a simple quantitative approach looking at metrics: we could have chosen to look at other engagement counts like the number of retweets, or looked at the number of followers of the accounts tweeting about each animal (because a "cooler" account will have more followers). Much of the challenge in using Twitter for research is both about asking the right research question and also the choosing the right approach to the data to address that research question.

## Prepare a dataset for sharing/using a shared dataset

> Having performed this analysis and come to a conclusion, it is good practice to share the underlying data so other people can reproduce these results (with some caveats). Noting that we want to preserve Twitter user's agency over the availability of their content, and Twitter's Developer Agreement, we can do this by creating a dataset of tweet IDs. Instead of sharing the content of the tweets, we can share the unique ID for that tweet, which allows others to `hydrate` the tweets by retrieving them again from the Twitter API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having performed this analysis and come to a conclusion, it is good practice to share the underlying data so other people can reproduce these results (with some caveats). Noting that we want to preserve Twitter users' agency over the availability of their content, and Twitter's Developer Agreement, we can do this by creating a dataset of tweet IDs. Instead of sharing the content of the tweets, we can share the unique ID for that tweet, which allows others to `hydrate` the tweets by retrieving them again from the Twitter API.
```
